Added mdx file for Fine-tuning for Object Detection file. (#218)
johko/computer-vision-course: chapters/en/Unit 3 - Vision Transformers/Vision Transformer for Objection Detection.mdx

# Vision Transformers for Object Detection 

> In this section we are going to understand about how Object detection tasks are achieved using Vision Transformers. We will understand how we can fine-tune existing pre-trained object detection models for our specific usecase. Before getting started, check out this HuggingFace Space, where you can play around with the final output.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this section, let's explore how to accomplish Object detection task using Vision Transformers. You will learn how to fine-tune existing pre-trained object detection models for your particular use case. Before getting started, check out this HuggingFace Space, where you can play around with the final output.
```

<iframe
	src="https://huggingface.co/spaces/hf-vision/finetuning_demo_for_object_detection"
	frameborder="0"
	width="850"
	height="450">
</iframe>

## Introduction

![intro](https://huggingface.co/datasets/hf-vision/course-assets/resolve/main/object_detection_wiki.png)

> Object detection is a computer vision task aims at identifying and localizing objects within an image or video. It involves two primary steps:

Author: Done

- First, recognizing the types of objects present (such as cars, people, or animals),
- Second, determining their precise locations by drawing bounding boxes around them.

These models typically receive images (static or frames from videos) as their inputs, with multiple objects present in each image. For example, consider an image containing several objects such as cars, people, bicycles, and so on. Upon processing the input, these models produce a set of numbers that convey the following information:  

- Location of the object (XY coordinates of the bounding box)
- Class of the object.

> There are a lot of of applications around object detection. One most significant examples is in the field of autonomous driving, where object detection is used to detect different objects (like pedestrians, road signs, traffic lights, etc)  around the car that become one of the inputs for taking decisions.

Author: Done

> If you want to understand more around the ins-and-outs of object detection, check out our [dedicated chapter](#) on Object Detection 🤗

Author: Awesome, added thanks

> To deepen your understanding of the ins-and-outs of object detection, check out our [dedicated chapter](https://github.com/johko/computer-vision-course/blob/main/chapters/en/Unit%206%20-%20Basic%20CV%20Tasks/object_detection.mdx) on Object Detection 🤗

Author: Done

### Why do we need fine-tuning for object detection 🤔

> That is an awesome question. Before reading the answer, checkout our definitions of fine-tuning and it's difference with transfer learning [here](#).

Author: Added the link

> That is an awesome question. Before reading the answer, check out our definitions of fine-tuning and how it differs from transfer learning [here](https://book.premai.io/state-of-open-source-ai/fine-tuning/#transfer-learning-versus-fine-tuning).

Author: Done

> That is an awesome question. Before reading the answer, check out our definitions of fine-tuning and how it differs from transfer learning [here](https://book.premai.io/state-of-open-source-ai/fine-tuning/#transfer-learning-versus-fine-tuning).

Author: With some searches, I was't able to find any mdx reference for now. So for now I am removing this part.

Training an object detection model from scratch means:

1. Doing already done research over and over again.
2. Writing repetitive model code and training them and maintaining different repositories for different use cases.
3. Lot of experimentation and waste of resources.

> So, instead what we can do is, simply take a superstar pre-trained model (a model which does an awesome job in recognizing general features), and tweak or re-tune their weights (or some part of their weights) to adapt it for our use case. We believe or assume that, the pre-trained model has already learned enough to extract significant features inside an image to locate and classify objects. So, if new objects are introduced, then the same model can be trained for a small period of time and compute to start detecting those new objects with the help of already learned and new features.

Author: Done

> 

Author: Done

> 

Author: Done

By the end of this tutorial, you should be able to make a full pipeline (from loading datasets, fine-tuning a model and doing inference) for object detection use case.

## Installation

Let's start with installation. Just execute the below cells to install the necessary packages. For this tutorial, we will be using Hugging Face 🤗 Transformers and PyTorch.

```bash
!pip install -U -q datasets transformers[torch] evaluate timm albumentations accelerate
```

## Scenario

To make this tutorial interesting, let's consider a real-world example. Consider this scenario: construction workers require the utmost safety when working in construction areas. Basic safety protocol requires wearing them helmet every time. Since there are lot of construction workers, it is hard to keep and eye on everyone everytime.

> But, if we can have a camera system, which can detect persons and whether the person is wearing a helmet or not in real time, that would be awesome, right?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
But, if we can have a camera system that can detect persons and whether the person is wearing a helmet or not in real-time, that would be awesome, right?
```

> So, we are going to fine-tune a light weight object detection model for doing the same. Let's dive in.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
So, we will fine-tune a light weight object detection model for doing the same. Let's dive in.
```

> So, we are going to fine-tune a light weight object detection model for doing the same. Let's dive in.

Author: Done

### Dataset

> Keeping in mind for the above scenerio, we will be using the [hardhat](https://huggingface.co/datasets/hf-vision/hardhat) dataset provided by [Northeaster University China](https://dataverse.harvard.edu/dataset.xhtml?persistentId=doi:10.7910/DVN/7CBGOS). We will be using 🤗 `datasets` to download and load this dataset.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Keeping in mind for the above scenario, we will be using the [hardhat](https://huggingface.co/datasets/hf-vision/hardhat) dataset provided by [Northeaster University China](https://dataverse.harvard.edu/dataset.xhtml?persistentId=doi:10.7910/DVN/7CBGOS). We will be using `datasets` library to download and load this dataset.
```

```python
from datasets import load_dataset

dataset = load_dataset("anindya64/hardhat")
dataset
```

This will give you the following data structure:

```
DatasetDict({
    train: Dataset({
        features: ['image', 'image_id', 'width', 'height', 'objects'],
        num_rows: 5297
    })
    test: Dataset({
        features: ['image', 'image_id', 'width', 'height', 'objects'],
        num_rows: 1766
    })
})
```

> Above is a [Hugging Face DatasetDict](https://huggingface.co/docs/datasets/v2.17.1/en/package_reference/main_classes#datasets.DatasetDict), which is an efficient dict like structure containing the whole dataset in train and test splits. As you can under each split (train and test), we have `features` and `num_rows`. Under features we have the `image` which is a [Pillow Object](https://realpython.com/image-processing-with-the-python-pillow-library/), the id of the image, height and width and objects. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Above is a [DatasetDict](https://huggingface.co/docs/datasets/v2.17.1/en/package_reference/main_classes#datasets.DatasetDict), which is an efficient dict-like structure containing the whole dataset in train and test splits. As you can see, under each split (train and test), we have `features` and `num_rows`. Under features, we have the `image`, a [Pillow Object](https://realpython.com/image-processing-with-the-python-pillow-library/), the id of the image, height and width, and objects. 
```

Now let's see how does each datapoint (in train/test set) looks like. To do that, you just have to write this:

```python
dataset['train'][0]
```

And this will give you the following structure:

```
{'image': <PIL.JpegImagePlugin.JpegImageFile image mode=RGB size=500x375>,
 'image_id': 1,
 'width': 500,
 'height': 375,
 'objects': {'id': [1, 1],
  'area': [3068.0, 690.0],
  'bbox': [[178.0, 84.0, 52.0, 59.0], [111.0, 144.0, 23.0, 30.0]],
  'category': ['helmet', 'helmet']}}
```

> As you see `objects` is an another dict containing the object ids (which are the class ids here), the area of the objects, and the bounding box co-ordinates (bbox) and the category which are the label. Here is a more detailed explaination of each of the keys and values of a data element. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As seen, `objects` is another dict containing the object ids (which are the class ids here), the area of the objects, the bounding box coordinates (bbox), and the category, which is the label. Here is a more detailed explanation of each of the keys and values of a data element. 
```

> 1. `image`: This is a Pillow Image object that helps to look into the image directly before even loading from the path.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `image`: This is a Pillow Image object that helps to look into the image directly before even loading from the path.
```

> 2. `image_id`: Denotes which number of image is from the train file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `image_id`: Denotes which number of images is from the train file.
```

> 3. `width`: The width of the image.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `width`: The width of the image.
```

> 4. `height`: The height of the image.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `height`: The height of the image.
```

> 5. `objects`:  Another dictionary containing information about annotation. This contains the following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `objects`:  Another dictionary containing information about annotation. This contains the following:
```

>     1. `id`: A list, where length of list denotes the number of objects and value of each denotes the class index.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - `id`: A list, where the length of the list denotes the number of objects and the value of each denotes the class index.
```

>     2. `area`: The area of the object.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - `area`: The area of the object.
```

    3. `bbox`: Denotes bounding box coordinates of the object.

>     4. `category`: The class (string) of the object.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - `category`: The class (string) of the object.
```

> Now let's properly extract the train and test samples. For this example, we have around 5000 training samples and 1700 test samples. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now let's properly extract the train and test samples. We have around 5000 training samples and 1700 test samples for this example. 
```

> Now let's properly extract the train and test samples. For this example, we have around 5000 training samples and 1700 test samples. 

Author: Done

```python
# First, extract out the train and test set

train_dataset = dataset['train']
test_dataset = dataset['test']
```

> Now, that we know what a sample data point contains, let's start with plotting that sample. Here we are going to first draw the image and then also draw the corresponding bounding box associated.

Author: Done

Here is what we are going to do:

> 1. Get the image and it's corresponding height and width.

Author: Done

> 2. Make a draw object that can easily draw text and lines on image.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Make a draw object that can easily draw text and lines on an image.
```

> 1. Get the image and it's corresponding height and width.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Get the image and its corresponding height and width.
```

Author: Done

3. Get the annotations dict from the sample.
4. Iterate over it.
5. For each, get the bounding box co-ordinates, which are x (where the bounding box starts horizontally), y (where the bounding box starts vertically), w (width of the bounding box), h (height of the bounding box).

> 6. Now if the bounding box measures are normalized then scale it, else leave it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Now, if the bounding box measures are normalized, then scale it or leave it.
```

> 7. And finally draw the rectangle and the the class category text.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- And finally, draw the rectangle and the class category text.
```

```python 
import numpy as np
from PIL import Image, ImageDraw

def draw_image_from_idx(dataset, idx):
    sample = dataset[idx]
    image = sample["image"]
    annotations = sample['objects']
    draw = ImageDraw.Draw(image)
    width, height = sample['width'], sample['height']

    for i in range(len(annotations["id"])):
        box = annotations["bbox"][i]
        class_idx = annotations["id"][i]
        x, y, w, h = tuple(box)
        if max(box) > 1.0:
            x1, y1 = int(x), int(y)
            x2, y2 = int(x + w), int(y + h)
        else:
            x1 = int(x * width)
            y1 = int(y * height)
            x2 = int((x + w) * width)
            y2 = int((y + h) * height)
        draw.rectangle((x1, y1, x2, y2), outline="red", width=1)
        draw.text((x1, y1), annotations["category"][i], fill="white")
    return image

draw_image_from_idx(dataset=train_dataset, idx=10)

> ```

Author: Yes I added a PR: https://huggingface.co/datasets/hf-vision/course-assets/discussions/80, will add once merged

Now, we have written a function to plot one single image, let's write a simple function using the above to plot multiple images. This will let us to do some analysis.

```python
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

def plot_images(dataset, indices):
    """
    Plot images and their annotations.
    """
    num_rows = len(indices) // 3
    num_cols = 3
    fig, axes = plt.subplots(num_rows, num_cols, figsize=(15, 10))

    for i, idx in enumerate(indices):
        row = i // num_cols
        col = i % num_cols

        # Draw image
        image = draw_image_from_idx(dataset, idx)

        # Display image on the corresponding subplot
        axes[row, col].imshow(image)
        axes[row, col].axis('off')

    plt.tight_layout()
    plt.show()

# Now use the function to plot images

> plot_images(train_dataset, range(9))

Author: I am waiting to get this PR merged: https://huggingface.co/datasets/hf-vision/course-assets/discussions/80

> plot_images(train_dataset, range(9))

Author: Done, added

```

## AutoImageProcessor

Before fine-tuning the model, we must preprocess the data in such a way that it matches exactly with the approach it was used during the time if pre-training. HuggingFace [AutoImageProcessor](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/v4.36.0/en/model_doc/auto#transformers.AutoImageProcessor) takes care of processing the image data to create pixel_values, pixel_mask, and labels that a DETR model can train with.

Now, let us instantiate the image processor from the same checkpoint we want to use our model to fine-tune.

```python
from transformers import AutoImageProcessor

checkpoint = "facebook/detr-resnet-50-dc5"
image_processor = AutoImageProcessor.from_pretrained(checkpoint)
```

## Preprocessing the dataset

> In this section, we will preprocess the dataset. Basically, we will apply different types of augmentations to the images, along with their corresponding bounding boxes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before passing the images to the `image_processor`, let's also apply different types of augmentations to the images along with their corresponding bounding boxes.
```

In simple terms, augmentations are some set of random transformations like rotations, resizing etc. These are applied for the following reasons:

> 1. To get more samples.

Author: done

2. To make the vision model more robust towards different conditions of the image.

> We will use the [albumentations](https://github.com/albumentations-team/albumentations) library to achieve this. If you want to dig deeper into different types of augmentations, check out the corresponding unit to learn more. Let's create some random transformations using albumentations.

Author: I am not seeing any chapter done things on albumentations, (let me know if I am missing anything out here, so for now I am going to remove this part)

> We will use the [albumentations](https://github.com/albumentations-team/albumentations) library to achieve this. If you want to dig deeper into different types of augmentations, check out the corresponding unit to learn more. Let's create some random transformations using albumentations.

Author: Okay, sure

So, all the heavy lifting is done so far. Now, all that is left is to assemble each part of the puzzle one by one. Let's go!

The training procedure involves the following steps:

1. Loading the base (pre-trained) model with [AutoModelForObjectDetection](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/v4.36.0/en/model_doc/auto#transformers.AutoModelForObjectDetection) using the same checkpoint as in the preprocessing.

2. Defining all the hyperparameters and additional arguments inside [TrainingArguments](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/v4.36.0/en/main_classes/trainer#transformers.TrainingArguments).

3. Pass the training arguments inside [HuggingFace Trainer](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/v4.36.0/en/main_classes/trainer#transformers.Trainer), along with the model, dataset and image.

4. Call the `train()` method and fine-tune your model.

> When loading the model from the same checkpoint that you used for the preprocessing, remember to pass the label2id and id2label maps that you created earlier from the dataset’s metadata. Additionally, we specify ignore_mismatched_sizes=True to replace the existing classification head with a new one.

```python

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

from transformers import AutoModelForObjectDetection

id2label = {0:'head', 1:'helmet', 2:'person'}
label2id = {v: k for k, v in id2label.items()}

model = AutoModelForObjectDetection.from_pretrained(
    checkpoint,
    id2label=id2label,
    label2id=label2id,
    ignore_mismatched_sizes=True,
)

```

> Before proceeding further, login to Hugging Face, to upload your model on the fly while training. In this way you do not need to take care of handling the checkpoints and saving them somewhere. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Before proceeding further, login to Hugging Face Hub to upload your model on the fly while training. In this way, you do not need to handle the checkpoints and save them somewhere. 
```

> Before proceeding further, login to Hugging Face, to upload your model on the fly while training. In this way you do not need to take care of handling the checkpoints and saving them somewhere. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before proceeding further, log in to Hugging Face to upload your model on the fly while training. In this way you do not need to take care of handling the checkpoints and saving them somewhere. 
```

> Before proceeding further, login to Hugging Face Hub to upload your model on the fly while training. In this way, you do not need to handle the checkpoints and save them somewhere. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before proceeding further, log in to Hugging Face Hub to upload your model on the fly while training. In this way, you do not need to handle the checkpoints and save them somewhere. 
```

image = Image.open(requests.get(url, stream=True).raw)

# make the object detection pipeline

obj_detector = pipeline("object-detection", model="anindya64/detr-resnet-50-dc5-hardhat-finetuned")
results = obj_detector(train_dataset[0]['image'])

print(results)
```

Now let's make a very simple function to plot the results. Simply what ever results, we get, parse each of the result instance. Get the score, label and corresponding bounding boxes. And finally draw that.

```python

def plot_results(image, results, threshold = 0.7):
    image = Image.fromarray(np.uint8(image))
    draw = ImageDraw.Draw(image)
    for result in results:
        score = result['score']
        label = result['label']
        box = list(result['box'].values())
        if score > threshold:
            x, y, x2, y2 = tuple(box)
            draw.rectangle((x, y, x2, y2), outline="red", width=1)
            draw.text((x, y), label, fill="white")
            draw.text((x+0.5, y-0.5), text=str(score), fill='green' if score > 0.7 else 'red')
    return image

```

And finally use this function for the same test image we used.

```

> plot_results(image, results)

Reviewer: Add the resulting image here

Author: Added

```

> ### Clubbing it altogather into a function

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> Now, let's club everything togather into a simple function.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now, let's club everything together into a simple function.
```

```python
def predict(image, pipeline, threshold=0.7):
    results = pipeline(image)
    return plot_results(image, results, threshold)

# Let's test for another test image

img = test_dataset[0]['image']
predict(img, obj_detector)
```

Let's even plot multiple images using our inference function on a small test sample. 

```python 
from tqdm.auto import tqdm

def plot_images(dataset, indices):
    """
    Plot images and their annotations.
    """
    num_rows = len(indices) // 3
    num_cols = 3
    fig, axes = plt.subplots(num_rows, num_cols, figsize=(15, 10))

    for i, idx in tqdm(enumerate(indices), total=len(indices)):
        row = i // num_cols
        col = i % num_cols

        # Draw image
        image = predict(dataset[idx]['image'], obj_detector)

        # Display image on the corresponding subplot
        axes[row, col].imshow(image)
        axes[row, col].axis('off')

    plt.tight_layout()
    plt.show()

> plot_images(test_dataset, range(6))

Reviewer: Add the output image to show the result

Author: Added

- First, recognizing the types of objects present (such as cars, people, or animals),
- Second, determining their precise locations by drawing bounding boxes around them.

These models typically receive images (static or frames from videos) as their inputs, with multiple objects present in each image. For example, consider an image containing several objects such as cars, people, bicycles, and so on. Upon processing the input, these models produce a set of numbers that convey the following information:  

- Location of the object (XY coordinates of the bounding box)
- Class of the object.

There are a lot of of applications around object detection. One of the most significant examples is in the field of autonomous driving, where object detection is used to detect different objects (like pedestrians, road signs, traffic lights, etc)  around the car that become one of the inputs for taking decisions.  

To deepen your understanding of the ins-and-outs of object detection, check out our [dedicated chapter](/chapters/en/Unit%206%20-%20Basic%20CV%20Tasks/object_detection.mdx) on Object Detection 🤗

> ### The Need to Fine-tune Models in Object Detection? 🤔

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### The Need to Fine-tune Models in Object Detection 🤔
```
